# On the Importance of Philosophy

---

Philosophy is important because science is born out of philosophy. Let's take an example: LLMs. All modern LLMs (as of the time of writing this – CE 2025) are based on the Transformer architecture. And how was the Transformer architecture invented? Ashish Vaswani and his team thought about how the human brain understood text. They reached the conclusion that, when we read a text, we understand every word of it by relating it to every other word. (Note: We also relate the text to our understanding of the real world but that was kind of beyond the scope of their research.) That's philosophical thinking: understanding how the world works by observing and reasoning. Once they expressed this idea of attention in mathematical notation, it became science. Once those mathematical formulae were put to use by computing machines, the science proved fruitful. Let's take another, quite simple and basic, example: Newton's laws of motion. Every student of science begins from those. And how did Newton discover those laws? He observed things in motion, made inferences, and verified them through experiments. Before the experimental verification stage, they were just philosophical conjectures, born out of the fancies of a brain that observed too much and thought too much about things that other people didn't care about – and that's how science has always worked. Philosophical conjecture -> mathematical representation -> experimental verification/practical implementation. That's why theory is significant, but without the checks and bounds of practicality, philosophy can easily get in on its own head and end up turning into nonsense. Hence, a balance of theoretical analysis and syntheses, combined with practical observations and verifications that are impartial to the outcomes, is necessary for human progress.